This repository is an experimental fork of the [Maiko Medley Interlisp virtual machine](https://github.com/Interlisp/maiko).

The present goal is to reduce complexity of the VM and make it easier to build and run on all supported platforms. 
One idea is to replace the OS and display dependencies by a Qt (i.e. [LeanQt](https://github.com/rochus-keller/LeanQt/)) 
based plattform abstraction layer (as e.g. done for [Oberon System 3](https://github.com/rochus-keller/OberonSystem3)).

To avoid confusions with the original project, this version of the VM is called "Gingko" (in reference to [Ginkgo](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ginkgo)) instead of "Maiko"[^1].

#### How to use

- Download and unpack any of the official Medley deployments, e.g. [this one](https://github.com/Interlisp/medley/releases/download/medley-240926-e1989850/medley-full-linux-x86_64-240926-e1989850_240513-4becc6ad.tgz); the specific CPU is not relevant in this context.
- Download the code of this repository to a local folder and run `gcc *.c -std=c99 -fno-strict-aliasing -lSDL2 -lm -o gingko` in this folder
- Run `./gingko -sysout <path-to-sysout>`, or even simpler `./gingko <path-to-sysout>`; the sysout are located in the medley/loadups folder of the downloaded Medley deployment

So far this guide applies to Unix systems including Cygwin. For Mac M1 use the precompiled binary below.

Native Windows support is work in progress.

#### Status on 2024-10-04

- Downloaded original source code from https://github.com/Interlisp/maiko, commit 91e0cea by 2024-09-17.
- Reduced the file tree to only the *.c and *.h files required to build the SDL2 executable "ldesdl" and combined these files into one directory.
- Added a qmake (*.pro) file able to build the executable; to make the build work I added vdate.c generated by the original build, fixed an issue on main.c:835, and changed the path in version.h:15.
- The resulting executable is able to run the full.sysout image found in the medley/loadups subdirectory of the [original deployment](github.com/.../medley-full-linux-x86_64-240926-e1989850_240513-4becc6ad.tgz) on Linux i386, using e.g. the command `./gingko -noscroll -sc 1024x768 -sysout <path-to>full.sysout`.

#### Status on 2024-10-05

- Refactored interpreter loop
- Defined SDL and RELEASE in version.h
- A lot of changes to make the code C99 compatible
- Removed a lot of unused code and defines (DOS, Haiku, Sun OS4/5 and X no longer supported)
- The VM can now be simply built using the cc *.c command (see below)

#### Status on 2024-10-09

- Refactored SDL keyboard handling so that the VM properly works with any keyboard present on the host machine (subject to further testing)
- Adapted the run-medley shell script so that it directly works with the gingko executable; just put both in the same directory, set the MEDLEYDIR environment variable to the path where the medley directory is located (`export MEDLEYDIR=<path-to>medley`), and then run `./run-medley`. When run with this method, also the Dinfo command works (if directly run with `./gingko ...` as described above, not everything is found, but still enough to directly run gingko with GDB to debug the VM).
- Alternatively and much simpler, if the path provided for the -sysout option points into the medley directory (i.e. includes the /loadups/ subdirectory), no shell script or export is required; just run `./gingko -sysout <path-to-sysout>`, or even simpler `./gingko <path-to-sysout>`.

#### Status on 2024-10-13

- Gingko was meanwhile validated by an experienced Medley user (see [this thread](https://github.com/Interlisp/medley/issues/1780#issuecomment-2408907215)) and seems to work sufficiently well as a tool to ease exploration of Medley (though some features I consider less important are not supported).
- The feedback from pamoroso and nbriggs has been considered and implemented.
- Gingko therefore supports international keyboards and is easier to build and install than Maiko.

#### Status on 2025-01-20

- Removed ether, nethub, dld ffi, never, rs232, jlisp, tty, and ufn
- Additional simplifications and refactorings (removed e.g. sdl3 support and fg/bg option)
- Found that random crashes happen if not compiled with -fno-strict-aliasing
- Added BUSY file for Mac M1 build

#### Precompiled versions

The following precompiled versions are available at this time:

- [Mac M1](http://software.rochus-keller.ch/gingko_mac_m1.zip)

Just download and unzip to run it. You need a pre-installed SDL2 library on your system (on Mac you can install it using e.g. `brew install SDL2`).

#### How to build

Download this repository, and then either ...

1. open a terminal in the Gingko directory and run `gcc *.c -std=c99 -fno-strict-aliasing -lSDL2 -lm -o gingko`
2. or open the file Gingko.pro in Qt Creator and run the build,
3. or open the file BUSY using [LeanCreator](https://github.com/rochus-keller/leancreator/) and run the build.

Methods 1 and 2 have been tested on Linux so far. Method 3 has been tested on Mac M1.

#### Additional Credits

See README_Maiko.md for more information about the original Maiko VM, and the files LICENSE and NOTICE for 
licensing information.


[^1]: actually "Geiko" would probably have been more terminologically obvious, but the term has an undesirable connotation; the name "Ginkgo" itself is [derived from a misspelling of the Japanese pronunciation "gin kyō"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ginkgo_biloba#Etymology) (銀杏), meaning "silver apricot," a reference to the tree's fruit; in botanical contexts, both "Ginkgo" and "Gingko" are used interchangeably; according to Wikipedia, "Gingko" (i.e. Ginkgo) is a "living fossil", which fits very well with Interlisp and Medley ;-)

